[Music]
well first of all let me say what I've
never said in this sanctuary before
welcome to Socrates in the city you can
applaud now that's traditionally
traditionally that's when people applaud
I am so thrilled to be here Dallas is
one of my absolute favorite places in
the world that people want to know where
I am when I'm not home
probably it's Dallas I get here a fair
amount
I've already recognized a bunch of you
from other events it is a joy to be here
and it's a joy to do Socrates in the
city in Dallas I think it's important
for us to talk about what we call life
God and other small topics in a fun way
I've always said and I even said earlier
at a dinner we had that if you know that
you know there is a God and that he's a
God that is for us and not against us
and that he is the author of reality and
all that kind of stuff
you really aren't afraid of anything
you're not afraid of exploring the truth
you're not afraid of where the facts
might take you you're not afraid of
where the evidence might take you which
is why it's my thesis that science and
real faith are friends not enemies they
ought to be so I love to talk to
scientists I have interviewed now
Stephen Meyer with whom I'll be speaking
in a minute I've interviewed him a
number of times before at Socrates and
city events and every single time we've
done it I
say never again and then something
happens I forget what happened and then
somehow we end up doing it again
every single time I say I'm not gonna do
it again and here we are
so we're gonna get through this together
I don't want to be here any more than
you do trust me okay we're gonna we're
just gonna do our best to get through
this Steven Mayer has a few credentials
I'd like to share with you he has a PhD
in the history and philosophy of science
from Cambridge who doesn't he as you
heard he's the director of the Centre
for science and culture at Discovery
Institute in Seattle that's that's
actually slightly rarer there are very
few people who are other directors of
the Center for science and culture at
Discovery Institute in Seattle that's a
smaller group of us isn't it
he now this is a kind of a big one he is
one of the pioneers in articulating the
theory of intelligent design in science
if that doesn't impress you you're
clearly not listening or you don't speak
English that is a big deal I hate to
embarrass people when they're in the
room actually that's not true I love to
room but that's a very big deal I am
thrilled to think that tonight I get to
speak to my friend Steven Mayer if in
fact he's still my friend I'm not gonna
look him in the eye he has written many
books all of which I really must
recommend a signature in the cell DNA
and the evidence for intelligent design
Darwin's doubt the explosive origin of
animal life and the case for intelligent
design what is very rare about Steven
Mayer is that he is a real scientist
who's operating at the top scientific
level who's also able to communicate
those ideas to those of us who are not
operating at the top scientific level
which is a lot of us in the room yeah I
think it's really important that we have
public conversations on the issues of
science and faith and all those big
things it's why I've been doing Socrates
and city all these years and I have to
say I really never have more fun than
when I get to talk to a brilliant
scientist like Steven Mayer except when
I'm actually talking to Steven Mayer
who's here tonight Steven Mayer welcome
to Socrates in the city come on up
[Applause]
after this no this is it this is the
last one um the problem I have of these
events is that I so enjoy your humorous
introductions I forget I have to come up
and say something yeah no you didn't
have to I could just go on and on and on
but I think some of these people would
leave quickly
ah you um I I've talked to you before
but a lot of the folks here and who are
watching this on youtube or on their
phones or wherever they are on the
subway because we're videotaping this
they don't know your story so I want to
talk about your new book which excites
me like crazy I have to say I didn't
think you could write another book that
I would be really really excited about
it but you've done it and the title of
that book now you have a title for the
new book yes okay what is the title for
the new book the return of the god
hypothesis the return of the god
hypothesis so my first question not yet
but when we get to that book will be
what do you mean the return of the gods
but I want to talk to you about your
career a little bit and how you got to
be who you are I said you're a scientist
you're also philosopher right okay so
how did you get to be who you are today
what was the path when you were where
did you grow up I grew up in the
Northwest Seattle area I went to
university in Washington State Whitworth
college now University
I majored in physics and geology and I
took a lot of philosophy classes along
the way and I came to Dallas after I
graduated now you say again you majored
in physics physics yeah and you took a
lot of philosophy classes along the way
now is that just to make other people
feel stupid what did you like you
like what is the reason for that is
there an actual reason or you just wanna
make us feel bad what is the I was
always interested in in the you know the
question my mom age 12 told me on the
way home from church one day you're
gonna be a philosopher she said then
some of the questions that I was asking
but I was always interested in the
questions that were at the intersection
between science and philosophy you know
so I'm taking physics classes I know
there's annoying students that kept
asking the professor but but why but why
that but why that and for example I was
talking to kids today at the Covenant
School here in Dallas and we started we
had a little conversation about Newton
and his theory of universal gravity
something we all learned about in
physics class you drop a ball that falls
why does it fall it falls because of
gravity then you ask the question what
is gravity gravity turns out to be
nothing more than the tendency for
unsupported bodies to fall it's all kind
of circular and there's something really
mysterious about something that we
scientists think is sort of ordinary we
have equations we have laws but you
think about the moon up there in the sky
it's influencing it's causing tidal
action on the earth you know a long way
away but there's no no touching no touch
no touch you know pushing and pulling
Newton was mystified by this himself he
called it action at a distance how does
the moon separated by empty space cause
action on the earth you're asking me
well it's a question it's question I
would say gravity
I think it's just a thing that mass has
it's a property it's a property yeah
that's as far as I'm willing to take it
yeah it's the thing they were trying to
get away from in the early part of the
Scientific Revolution what the medievals
used to do is they would name and they
would give to an effect a name which was
just renaming right affect its own cause
it was like chronic fatigue syndrome
yeah right right right fatigue all the
time I would say chronically yeah it
sounds like exactly exactly you say what
is it and they say it's chronic fatigue
syndrome
yeah or opium puts you to sleep because
it has a dormant to virtue
yeah so then the problem was Newton
comes along he writes this beautiful
mathematical equation describing method
and describing the movement of the
planets yeah and the the force of
gravity but what gravity is was actually
causing it he's in the Latin he says
hypothesis none finger which means I
don't feign to know the cause non finger
on Fingal he doesn't know and so so you
there's stuff in science that scientists
get really used to manipulating and
describing but there's deep mysteries
underlying it that we hardly ever think
about but Newton did and that's what
fascinated me and grow well that's cool
I think that's one of the reasons I love
talking to you because there are a lot
of really brainy scientists but they
might not be thinking about why right to
think about why to ask those questions I
think those of us who are not scientists
have those why questions and we always
want to ask a scientist and sometimes
asking a scientist is like asking you
know a bad priest who says shut up we
don't ask questions here
you know because questions are
challenging as you said so all right I
had a terrific physics professor in
college he finally caught on to what was
bugging me and he'd say okay listen you
when when you ask why and then I give
you an answer and then you ask why again
and I give you an answer and when I give
you the answer it's just the phenomenon
it's what nature does we know not why
then it's okay and you can stop asking
questions and that's when I finally
realized oh I do understand physics I
understand it in the same way that
everyone else understands that we really
don't know I don't understand it yeah
and even
the great Isaac Newton had to you know
put some English on the ball by using
Latin term non fing go no right cuss
sounds you know very erudite it means I
don't know well his his ultimate answer
to that question interestingly since
we're talking about science and faith
was what had to do with would the way
God orders the the universe he wrote a
letter to a bishop named Bishop Bentley
he was being pressed by other scientists
who realized that his equations didn't
answer the cause question what causes
gravity he says I don't know they says
well they said well then you were not
really being the proper what scientists
in those days they called the mechanical
philosophers right but he admitted
privately to a bishop that he believed
that the real cause of gravity was
constant spirit action it was God's Way
of ordering the universe and he quoted a
paraphrased a passage of the Bible that
talked about in Christ all things are
held together the Colossians passage so
he was deeply religious guy who realized
that some of these deep mysteries were
not answered by materialistic
cause-and-effect that there must be
something that was beyond that in fact
spiritual yeah that sounds like a
theological way of saying I don't know
yeah right
Wow now anyway that's the sort of stuff
that interested me for a sec I was gonna
say I don't want to get stuck on this
but I have to ask you yeah
Newton lived you know 300 plus years ago
in the 300 years since Newton have we
figured out what gravity is one of my
grad school supervisors and Cambridge
made this point to me said in 300 years
we've still really don't know why we
have new theories Einstein said that
gravity was caused by massive bodies
curving space and then that affected the
trajectory of other bodies passing
through that curved space the curved
space is still like well it's not a
thing doing any pushing and pulling it's
kind of hard to understand and then
people have come up with the idea of
gravitons but those are massless
particles causing gravity so of course
they are you know it it doesn't get any
better let's just say that yeah let's
move on yeah
I I'm trying to understand what you're
saying because I'm gonna give a talk
here tomorrow at 9:00 a.m. I want to
repeat a lot of this stuff you um okay
so you had an affinity to ask the big
questions he obviously had an affinity
for science as an undergraduate what did
you think you wanted to do and at what
point did you decide to go in the
direction that you've gone in well I
caft er I graduated I came to Dallas I
got a job in the 80s when the oil market
was up and I worked for as a
geophysicist for a atlantic richfield
company a big major oil company back in
the 80s and then in the mid 80s oil
market was down I had applied for a
rotary scholarship and I didn't get it
the first time but I got the second time
and was able to go to Britain and what
was the big event that occurred for me
here was an extraordinary conference
maybe somewhat like this one but it was
about the issue of how science and faith
go together and the conference was at
the Dallas Hilton and there were there
were there were representatives of what
was called scientific materialism or
some we'd called it you know like the
new atheist of scientific atheists and
scientists were theists and they were
discussing the big questions the origin
of the universe the origin of life and
the origin and nature of human
consciousness and I heard about it the
night before and attended just as a walk
up and I was just blown away by what I
heard in this very first session one of
the most famous astrophysicists in the
history of of astronomy astrophysics was
the heiress named as Allen sand it was
their own Sandage Sandage was an
agnostic Jew well known for that point
of view for most of his career even
worked with Edwin Hubble the great
astronomer who had verified that the
universe was expanding and had which was
crucial to establishing that the
universe had a beginning and Santa
shocked everybody by sitting with the
other theists though he was thought to
be one of the materialists and in his
talk explained how the evidence for both
the beginning of the
universe and its exquisite fine-tuning
had convinced him that there must be
something more than a strictly
materialistic account of the universe
and then he proceeded to reveal how he
realized that the evidence was pointing
in a frankly theistic direction and he
didn't like it and he was trying to
suppress it and finally he confronted
himself and said wait a minute I've
prided myself my whole life on my
scientific objectivity now the evidence
is pointing me towards the god
hypothesis what is it in me that doesn't
want that to be true
and I was incredibly taking I was going
to say that is one honest man and that's
rare
right because we always I think the
question we don't want to ask ourselves
is why am i biased because we just don't
want to think that we are biased so
that's a that's an extraordinary thing
so you were quite a young man at 26
walked in off the street to hear this
and early in my career as a scientist
here working in Easter walking off the
street yeah they line up when you're
sober I just want to make sure I was a
little delirious leaving because in
addition to Sandage at this amazing
session on the origin of life and the
you know my book about the signature in
the cell was really a combination of
what I first learned that in that so
this was a life changing it was
absolutely it was you know I'm going
this direction and I meet all these
interesting guys and scientists and I
begin to think about these big questions
in a new way the session on the origin
of life will have Jim tour here tomorrow
is sitting the front row phenomenal
scientist from Rice talking about it the
origin of life disciplined by the middle
of the 80's had reached an impasse it's
gotten it's made no progress since the
big problem is trying to get no hang on
when you say the origin of life you're
talking about the primordial soon
exactly I want to I want to translate
for those of us who are not at the top
scientific level there's a lot of us
here right okay so you're saying that in
the mid 80s there was how do we put this
they got to the point where people were
scientists were understanding that even
though they had been saying since the
Miller experiment
Cades earlier they've been saying that
there was this primordial soup and
lightning struck and the next thing you
know chemicals arrange themselves so
whatever way you're saying that in in
the mid 80s suddenly they had gotten to
the point of wondering why they didn't
have evidence for this hypothesis yeah
like an Apollo 11 Houston we have a
problem and the problem was many
problems but the most fundamental
problem was the discovery of the
information bearing properties of DNA
and the other large what are called bio
macromolecules in the cell Watson and
Crick 1953 they elucidate the structure
of DNA 1957 Crick realizes that the
chemical subunits along the interior
that double helix are functioning just
like alphabetic characters in a written
language or digital characters like the
zeros and ones in a machine code and
that they are directing the construction
of the proteins and protein machines
that all cells need to stay alive so
you've got digital information directing
the construction of the crucial
components of living cells and people
begin to this gets all elucidated in the
in the 60s and the people begin to
reflect on this and the origin of life
guys say well to explain the origin of
life that no means we have to explain
this complicated information processing
system and that's where I got really
sticky and because nobody nobody wants
to work that hard no no I mean how do
you get chemistry to produce code it
turned out to be a really difficult
problem and I was I first learned about
this at this same conference there was a
leading origin of life researcher named
Dean Kenyon Stanford PhD professor out
in California worked at NASA
he had a best-selling graduate level
book on this called biochemical
predestination and at this conference he
disclaims his own book and explains that
he has now become persuaded that there
must be some kind of guiding
intelligence responsible for the origin
of life he called it an intelligent
cause and there were three other
professors on this panel who had just
written a book called the mystery of
life's origin who were arguing the same
thing and I was working in industry in
geophysics doing a digital signal
processing which was an early form
of information technology and I got
absolutely fascinated with the idea that
the the the key to the mystery of the
origin of life was actually information
it was code and then obviously that that
follows you through through your career
and we'll talk about that a little bit
but I so listen to go back so so
everything changes for you so what what
do you do at this point you decide I
want to get a PhD in what well I was
thinking of something at the
intersection of science and philosophy
there's a field called the philosophy of
science Oxford and Cambridge have great
programs in that area I applied for a
rotary scholarship here in Dallas and I
was a runner up the first year and
actually to a great candidate who was
also a former Miss Texas and when I was
feeling kind of down in the dumps about
it one of the rotary adjudicators said
well don't feel too bad she was a great
candidate academically but she had some
attributes that you did not have my yet
other than strictly academic he said
yeah yeah yeah so he was referring to
the baton it's extraordinary because I
know you're not good at that yes okay so
thank you I got the scholarship you go
to Cambridge and and what are you
thinking I mean you're getting a PhD but
where do you what do you want to do with
that well I had been one of the guys
that was at this conference was Charles
Saxton and he was working at a small
think-tank here in Dallas
which is was directed by John Buell who
was here in the audience tonight who in
some ways was you know ground zero for
this whole concept of intelligent design
Charles was the lead author on this book
the mystery of life's origin and I was
introduced to him in the aftermath of
the conference started meeting him in
his office
and talking about these issues so by the
time I got actually got to England I
knew what I wanted to work on I wanted
to work on this origin of life question
Saxton had the idea that that it might
be possible to make a scientific
argument or a scientific case for the
theory of intelligent design and I got
think I wondered was that possible and
to answer that question I really needed
to study the scientific methods that
people like Darwin used to Rican
strucked events in the distant past cuz
this isn't the same kind of science it's
not like going into the laboratory and
and getting something to replicate
itself under controlled conditions you
had to reconstruct what might have
happened and so I began to study
Darwin's method of scientific reasoning
and became convinced that that could be
applied to the origin of life problem in
a way that would would support a design
hypothesis and at what point did you
think I've got something here well I'm
the first couple years after grad school
III was convinced that there was a
method by which you could make this case
but there were a lot of other questions
that had to be answered for example what
do we mean by information it has
multiple definitions and there's a
mathematical definition that just mean
is a measure of the improbability of a
sequence of symbols but that
mathematical definition called Shannon
information name for a pioneering
scientist named Claude Shannon who
developed information theory as a
subject didn't capture the notion of
meaning or function and so we were
groping for is so just an improbable
sequence might be the result of random
processes and so it might in random
processes might produce Shannon
information but DNA had more it has
something beyond just an improbable
array it was it had specificity of
arrangement in order to produce a
function like the kind of information we
use in computer code or the kind of
information that you know we in a Booker
and so it wasn't meeting another younger
guy at the time Bill demske William
demske and we began to talk about the
these issues of what what type of
information what's the analytical tool
we can develop to capture the thing that
indicates intelligent design what what
what is it that intelligent agents
produce that undirected natural
processes don't produce okay it wasn't
Shannon information it was functional
information or specified information I
want to just because you've said that
now I want to go broad for a second and
and talk about the concept of
intelligent design for those who really
aren't familiar with it I guess that
when you talk about material the
materialist
pothe assists that there is nothing in
the universe except material right and
and people say unless you can touch it
or smell it or whatever in other ISM
unless science can put in a test tube
and it doesn't exist right right and
it's always struck me that most people
don't operate with that hypothesis most
people know there's something else even
if you don't know what that something
else is right even just the mystery of
gravity would lead you to think as it
did Newton there's something else
something we haven't discovered yet but
then the big question is is there
something else beyond the known universe
and we don't just mean at the end of the
universe is there something beyond it
but is there something beyond the
material well before we even get to that
big question of beyond the universe I
think it's it's perfectly appropriate to
think of what what there is beyond just
the matter and energy around us and
there's another there's another
fundamental entity that we're all aware
of and that's mind because we have them
we are self consciously aware so Steven
Mayer it's what now when you say we all
have Minds right we know that a
materialist would say none and then we
have brains and a brain is like a
computer you're talking about some
spiritual thing called mind I don't
believe in that and I believe you're
confusing mind with brain and you're
somehow spiritualizing it so isn't it
true that a materialist a scientistic
thinker I don't mean scientific but
scientistic somebody who says there's
nothing outside the realm of science
that's it would argue there is no mind
even though most people kind of feel
that there is you have a lovely vividly
blue tie on right now and I have a I'm
complimenting your tie but I'm also
perceiving it right yeah so I have I
have a self conscious awareness of that
bright blue color and there's nothing
that corresponds to the electrochemistry
in my brain electrochemistry in my brain
we think helps generate that image but I
have a say first person
self-conscious awareness of that blue
that is that is separate from what my
brain cells are doing and most of us
have an awareness of our of our own
consciousness and our own our own
rational abilities as conscious Minds so
we have a first-person direct
introspective awareness of the reality
of a mind and and so let's say the same
thing in English I just mean no I know
you just said most of these people know
what you just said but just to be clear
because this is such an important point
and I want to kind of pivot on this
point what you're saying is that a
computer or a brain by itself is not
trenches consciousness your ability to
perceive yourself and to perceive up at
people whatever that mystery is think
deliberate - hope - fear - all those
things yes cannot be accounted for
through circuits or just the brain or
whatever you're saying there's this
other thing and I think most people
would agree with you that there's this
thing whether it's consciousness or mind
there's something beyond just some pink
tissue in our skulls and so then my
question is why do people in in the
scientific world today have this hard
line others why do they get upset at the
implication that there's something
beyond what science can tell us why is
there this even the idea that there's
some kind of a problem between faith and
science where do we where do we think
that came from because that's that's the
question that we're really talking yeah
there's a couple ways to answer that one
is historically to look back in the late
19th century there's a whole series of
theories about origins that suggests
that undirected natural processes
couldn't count for anything including
for example the origin of life and the
origin of new forms of life okay so the
first issue here is Darwin you get a
scientific materialists synthesis at the
end of the 19th century and then they
codify the idea that if you're going to
be a scientist you must explain things
in terms of undirected material
processes that's one way of answering
your question it's just sort of I mean
what you're saying is it just sort of
happened well there's an historical
shift in thinking and the period of of
Newton and Kepler and Boyle right they
were all they may design arguments in
their scientific work this was already
something obviously were devout
Christians they were but they also
thought they were seeing evidence of
design in their scientific studies so
they so so historically there was not a
problem
or a perceived problem between so-called
faith or Christian faith and so-called
science but something one supported the
other and there was a kind of close
connection between the two well on the
contrary they supported each so this was
a shift in the late 19th century a canon
of method was established or promulgated
by you know Darwin and others and said
if you're gonna be a scientist you must
limit yourself to explain things by
reference to material processes only but
there are so many things that we just
look around us do we think of the
information on a road sign or the
computer code or many many things around
as we know are the product of
intelligence of mine and this is the
other way of answering your question
what happened why do people object many
scientists working at the bench become
they forget about the role their own
mind is playing in the experiments that
they're that they're executing yeah so
professor tor for example as as shown
that many of these guys are doing these
what are called prebiotic simulation
experiments are actively involved in
choosing purified chemicals they have a
chemical recipe that you use to get the
molecules to to combine and recombine in
different ways so that the molecules are
more life relevant but at every step of
the way this process is guided by their
own scientific intelligence and they
just kind of forget that the mind is
playing a crucial role in other words
they're cheating well it is a cheat if
you want to turn around it I mean if
that's of course what it is now James
tour is right here is he misrepresenting
you or are we okay he's okay all right
he's much better on this and you'll hear
Amara yeah all right is Marshall McLuhan
in the audience I guess everybody who
cares about life the meaning of life we
think about these things and
think about how do we know what we know
and so on and so forth so what you've
just said you know most of us here grew
up in a world where the Miller
experiment that said that life was
created out of the primordial soup with
no touch from God or anything like that
we all were taught this in schools and
it was accepted and when in the 1980s
there were questions about this nobody
contacted us by mail or phone and said
by the way you know that thing that was
on the test we no longer really know if
that's true we just want you to be clear
on that it's like a like product you
know a recall on a car they would have
to legally contact you and say by the
way you know we told he was the greatest
girl but he could kill you so that never
happened and that to me is interesting
because that's how as a culture we
processed right like stuff gets out
there I was always taught that Darwin
you know Darwin was right and the idea
of natural selection and we did this is
how it all happened no one ever
contacted me to say by the way there are
a lot of big questions that have come up
and even evolutionists like Stephen Jay
Gould at Harvard is asking questions but
that information never gets out there's
been no recall in those bad textbooks
that's absolutely true so nobody in or
in origin of life research today thinks
that the miller-urey experiment solves
the problem at best it would give you
amino acids which are a building block
for proteins but to get a actual protein
that folds up and does an actual job
you've got a sequence those amino acids
properly that requires a big information
input and that's the unanswered question
where does that information right and
and and they don't know and I remember
reading an article in The Atlantic
Monthly in the 80s on this question of
the origin of life and I don't know but
I remember reading it and it was a long
article but what it said at the end
effectively was we thought we knew how
life evolved but the more we know the
more we discover that in fact we have no
idea right and it feels like that's what
you're talking about with the return of
the god hypothesis in other words that
the more we know scientifically
the more we realize that the concept of
a creator of a mind it's it's more and
more plausible the more science
progresses right which is the opposite
of the thesis that the more we know in
science the less there's a need for God
yeah this is the opposite of a God of
the gaps argument right in the case I
made for intelligent design just in
biology
I actually self-consciously applied the
method of reasoning that I learned from
Darwin and he had this rule of reasoning
which was if you want to explain an
event in the remote past you should look
around and observe cause and effect
processes and invoke Avera causa a true
cause a cause which is known to produce
the effect in question and I got to
thinking what is the effect what is the
cause that we know that produces digital
information and we know of only one it's
in mind it's a programmer Bill Gates our
local hero and in Seattle says DNA is
like like DNA is like a computer program
only much more advanced than any we've
ever devised and and in fact we know
from our experience our uniform and
repeated experience that whenever we see
information and we trace it back to its
source whether it's in a hieroglyphic
inscription a paragraph in a book right
information embedded in a radio signal
or the the information that's generated
in a prebiotic simulation experiment or
a computer program that's supposedly
simulating evolution there's always an
intelligent input that accounts for that
information so I said maybe we should
learn something from nature and apply
that to the problem of the origin of
information which is at the foundation
of life and infer that there was a
designing intelligence behind that
information - okay but the the person
disagreeing with you would say given
infinite time anything can happen in
other words if I flip a coin and it
lands on its side people go ooh but they
know it could happen sometimes it'll
happen if I flip a coin
10,000 times once or twice or whatever
that it'll happen but if I flip it again
and it lands on its side a second time
you'd be a little weirded out
what's the trick if I did it a third
time and I sat here for 20 minutes and
every time I flipped a dime it landed on
its side everyone would say something's
going on this doesn't make sense but
somebody might say look mathematically
given an infinite number of time it is
possible that that would happen in
infinity so what really changed all of
this it seems to me is the Big Bang
Theory that said we no longer have
infinite time we only have whatever it
is 12 or 15 billion years so at what
point did the Big Bang Theory grab a
hold generally speaking and began to
freak out the scientists who pinned
everything on infinite time that's a
great question
quick little sidelight is that you know
that's absolutely right you know you
there that established what is called a
limit on the probabilistic resources the
number of tries you would have to win
the win the biological cosmic lottery if
you will there's another another aspect
of that and dr. Turner will probably
talk about this tomorrow in his talk and
that is that chemically speaking time is
actually not your friend that when if
you're lucky enough to get some
molecules to arrange themselves into
something that's moving in the right
direction of life all the other
processes at work are gonna swamp that
and unwind that before you get any
further and he'll explain more about how
the chemistry of that works but but the
chance based argument is is suspect for
two reason one time isn't your friend it
works against the chemical synthesis of
life but also there's a limit to the
amount of time and that's absolutely
right in both of my books I look I look
carefully at the at the mathematics of
this and I have a little illustration I
like to use of a bike lock you've got a
four dial lock and you and I asked often
asked the audience well you know if
you're if you have a thief is it more
likely that he'll crack the code or not
and they'll say oh well for dialogue
it's more it's unlikely well unless the
thief has enough time to sample more
than half of
nations so you always have to assess how
many if you're assessing the
plausibility of a random search for an
informational sequence you have to know
how many opportunities you have versus
the complexity of the sequence it turns
out when you do the math both in the
prebiotic case and in the biological
case that is even assuming you've got
life to start with and now the Darwinian
mechanism of mutation and selection
takes over in both cases you don't have
the probabilistic resources necessary to
build even
standard-length functional proteins that
there's so many possible combinations
that have to be searched that there's
not enough time in a rent okay a random
search to succeed so the larger idea and
I know some folks are tracking and maybe
some aren't but the idea is that many of
us have heard this idea I don't know who
said it but somebody once said that you
know if you have you you probably know
it more exactly than I do but you know
monkeys typing on typewriters right
randomly hitting random stuff eventually
given enough time randomly they would
produce the works of William Shakespeare
because if it just has to happen
randomly right you know that if a monkey
just goes like this at some point maybe
it takes years but words will randomly
come together so what we're really
dealing with here is the idea that
you're saying I make want to make sure
that I'm clear on this that you're
saying that what is in DNA is so complex
it's like a library of books so it's not
like a monkey that would just you know
random random random and it's like all
we did type the words uh oh he just
typed the word cat we're talking about
50 novels by Dickens and Tolstoy we're
talking about something so complex that
you're saying that science now knows
that there could never have been enough
time it's the calculations that I show
show that it's more likely that a random
search for a new gene sequence capable
of building a new functional protein
will it's overwhelmingly more likely
that such as
would fail then it would that it would
succeed given all the possible
opportunities there are for such a
search to occur since the first life
tell now so it's still you know remember
Jim Carrey in that film you know he asks
the girl to go out and he says she says
he says what are the chances that a girl
like me and a guy like you who could get
together and this is his pickup line and
and she says not good and he says what
do you mean you know like 1 in 100 and
she says no one in a million buddy and
then he starts jumping up and down so oh
so there's a chance there's a chance ok
there's always a chance but the question
is it more likely that a random search
would succeed or fail and we can show
conclusively that it's more likely that
will fail and therefore the idea that
natural selection plus random mutation
is the means by which new information
was generated is also more likely to be
false than true and in science we prefer
not to have more likely to be false
right hypotheses and we prefer more
likely to be true hypotheses the most
fascinating part of what you just said
to me is if somebody could be as smart
as you and still watch Jim Carrey movies
isn't it isn't that the big takeaway
that's the surprise it's incredible
ok so I have a question your book is
called the return of the dot Isis okay
so to frame this you have been one of
the creators and proponents of this
thing called intelligent design which
says the universe looks designed science
tells us that it looks designed from the
more we know the more it doesn't look
like it just evolved randomly right but
intelligent design never posits who the
designer might be and that's why you
have felt comfortable in others be he
and M schema saying that it's science
we're just telling you what science
tells us and science tells us it looks
design we're not telling you who did the
designing that's not our business we're
scientists is that reasonably accurate
roughly roughly the case the theory of
intelligent design brief brief
definition is the idea that there are
certain features of living systems in
the universe that are best explained by
a designing intelligence as opposed to a
purely under
acted material process okay now in my
writing about the design that we see in
life I have to this point not tried to
make a case for the identity of the
designer because it is a there are two
possibilities if you're just talking
about biology life arises well after
time equals zero after the beginning of
the universe so it's at least logically
possible that there could be some
imminent form of intelligence and
intelligence in the universe that might
be responsible for the evidence of
design that we see in cells and and
animals and so forth and now I've never
heard that hypothesis I'm not kidding
well you know who's actually proposed it
is Richard Dawkins as mentioned this and
so his so did once did Francis Crick
Dawkins did it maybe in an unguarded
moment when he was being interviewed by
Ben Stein in the film expelled right and
he suggested maybe it was a space alien
or some some agent within the cosmos
seeded life to Planet Earth right
Crick actually wrote this up as a semi
serious proposal in a book in 1980 he
got so much pushback he said I'm never
gonna talk about the origin of life
again it's just too hard a problem but
it's I've never been persuaded by that
idea because even if you positive prior
intelligence and the cosmos then you
still have the information problem all
over again where'd you get the
information to build that who made me
alien who made the ailing light but it's
it's out there I've always I've always
said that the theory of intelligent
design is based on scientific evidence
but it has theistic implications it
seems it fits better in a theistic
worldview but I've also long since that
conference in 1985 been interested in
the cosmology in the physics and I've
done a deep dive on the biology for the
last you know 10 or 15 years and I
wanted to get back to this you know that
initial presentation I heard from Allan
Sandage and some of those scientists and
explore what the physics and the
cosmology can tell us about the identity
of the designer because if you just
think about another evidence of design
and you've written about this yet have
you had that wonderful piece in The Wall
Street Journal around Christmastime in
2014 about all the fine tuning of the
universe the laws and of physics are
finely tuned to allow for the
possibility of life the initial
conditions of the universe are finely
tuned the expansion rate of the universe
we have this kind of Goldilocks universe
where everything is just right to allow
for the possibility of life
but that's built into the cosmos from
the very beginning it's built into the
fabric of the laws of nature no alien
being or no imminent being within the
cosmos can be responsible for the laws
of physics that make its very existence
possible in which preceded its origin
back to the back to the very Big Bang
okay so again just so we're tracking you
were first when we're talking about the
origin of life theoretically we're
talking about something that happened
less than four billion years ago because
that's our our sense unless we're we're
young earth creationists our sense would
be that either way long after the
beginning of the universe okay right but
right but so now what you're talking
about when you say cosmology you're
talking about that moment many many more
billions of years before whatever what
what's the guessed these days 13.8
billion I knew that and so you're saying
that in that moment okay
this is many many billions of years
before the earth existed in any form
when the universe expanded out of
nothing which is what scientists say in
that moment it appears to have been
pre-designed it was a setup job to do to
become what it is well so this is this
is part of why you're you're saying that
he'd become even if you look at that it
becomes more or I should say when you
look at that in addition to the
difficulty of the origin of life being
explained the difficulty of everything
existing right being explained so one of
our other colleagues will be speaking
tomorrow's Jay Richards and he's written
a lot on the fine-tuning there's one
particular clip of his in a in a in a
science documentary where he explains
this beautifully you have there's what
there are two types of fine-tuning one
has to do with the strength of the
physical laws and these numbers that
physicists
represent they're called the universal
constant so if gravity were a little
stronger a little weaker if
electromagnetism a little stronger a
little weaker if the ratio between these
forces will off likely be impossible and
they're exquisitely finely tuned you
know one in 10 to the 40th power or more
you know with these so it's actually
Looney is Looney crazy Looney engineers
here would be familiar with the concept
of tolerances these are incredibly tiny
tolerances but then there's another type
of fine-tuning which has to do with the
the arrangement of matter and energy at
the beginning of the universe and to get
these stable orderly things we call
galaxies that can host planetary systems
the Oxford physicist sorry has Fred
Roger Roger Penrose has calculated that
the fine-tuning of the root of the
original configuration of matter would
have had to be exquisitely finely tuned
the number he came up with in his
calculations was one in one part to the
10 to the 10 to the 123 you can fill a
universe with the zeros after that
number what it's what they call a hyper
exponential fine-tuning so okay and that
and that's that's that's like getting
all the matter and energy in just the
right place so it will unfold to make
stable galaxies so this is completely
separate from the four constants right
that's a different issue but those are
also fine-tuned right I'll say the so so
so the question becomes Stephen what
does the scientific establishment do in
other words I made the case and then
I'll talk about it tomorrow morning that
the more science knows the more painful
it is to put forward the hypothesis that
it just happened randomly in other words
it becomes less and less and less and
less and less and less possible to
believe that it happened randomly now
that's the science so why doesn't the
scientific establishment own up to that
or what do they do with that and it was
what you're saying that they wouldn't
necessarily argue with it it's the
conclusion that they like some of the
physicists have definitely seen the
design implications
right from the beginning one of the
first physicists to discover a crucial
fine-tuning parameter was Fred Hoyle the
famous astrophysicist who was himself at
the time of really really committed
atheist and he discovered that all the
fine tuning parameters that were
necessary to make it possible to build
carbon in the universe which turns out
to be necessary to make make long-chain
like molecules which are necessary to
make life and he was so blown away with
the the precision of these fine tuning
parameters that he said a common sense
interpretation of the data suggests that
a super intellect as monkeyed with
physics as well as chemistry and biology
to make life possible in many others
this is the atheist admitted this right
and he in near the end of his career
he's very much I met him when I was in
grad school and he was actually very
very sympathetic to the intelligent
design idea in biology by that time as
well now he's by the way the man who
gave us the term the Big Bang well as it
was as a pejorative term he was trying
to ridicule it because he didn't want
the Big Bang to be true because as you
said it implied that there was a
beginning to the universe in the
creation event so he was really all in
the tank for scientific materialism
right but the fine-tuning evidence just
completely turned him around there and
there are other many other great
physicists who have seen that the
fine-tuning evidence the most common
sensical way to interpret it the most
natural way to interpret it is that
fine-tuning requires a fine tuner right
but others saw other physicists really
dedicated to this scientific materialist
worldview have posited alternative
explanations the most popular of which
today is that the idea that there's a
billion other universes out there
sometimes called the multiverse so many
in fact that it was would be necessary
at some point for some universe to get
exactly the right combination of factors
to make life possible it's winning the
cosmic lottery idea and even I know that
that's incredibly dumb that
that is well it's funny because
sometimes you know angry atheist
whatever I've used this term the Flying
Spaghetti Monster to talk about God and
stuff and I thought to myself to believe
that there is an infinite number of
universes or words some outrageous
number of universes in order to explain
why this one just happened to be perfect
right it's kind of like saying like if I
have a lock with with for what do you
call it on them you know for clicks yeah
where clicks or whatever it is I've got
I've got a lock like that and somebody
just walks into room and just gets it
just like that and you say well there
were 10,000 of those locks and they were
all random and one of them just you know
it just so happens that it happened to
be the right one I used to do this as a
gag in my in my classes I'd pass around
a lock to illustrate why does fine
tuning trigger the design inference and
I pass a lock around to the students and
and tell them that what I was trying to
demonstrate was that chant and the
chance would be an implausible way of
explaining the fine-tuning because one
way to represent the fine-tuning is with
a set a series of dials that are all set
just right right so I passed the lock
around a student 1 2 3 4 or 5 I get to
students 6 or 7 and the student would
pop the lock open and then and then
students would then start with cat calls
and sort of hooting like how he showed
you a prophecy see chance can do it but
then invariably someone in the class
would say wait a minute
was he for real was that a plant was
that a set up job and then and then
they'd start to accuse me and then I Wow
why would I do something like that and
then who moi yeah yeah but they knew I
had a reputation for gags in class and
and pretty and they would make a design
inference because they realized right
that not only was the event improbable
but it was functionally specified to do
something well you know also the idea
that we have an innate sense when
something doesn't make sense right and
and what we're talking about now a lock
with with with four of these dials the
universe it's like a lock with big
exponential with billions of dollars
billions and billions and billions of
dials right so you're telling us that
the most plausible combat the most
plausible explanation that scientists
are making is that oh yeah there are an
infinite number of universes the reason
I find that hilarious is that there is
literally no evidence for that there
can't be their love their universes
beyond our own and yet scientists who
believe it must be evidence that leads
us to our conclusions only evidence are
nonetheless positing this because
they're they're so uncomfortable with
the concept of a designer right
there's a wonderful physicist in
Cambridge named John Polkinghorne who
was one of the pioneers in advancing
this fine-tuning design argument and in
his wonderful British understated way I
got to interview him one time as you're
doing with me I wasn't nearly as funny
but he said he said well I I don't say
that the atheists are stupid I just say
that theism provides a more satisfying
explanation and and there's a there's
another reason for that and that's that
I explore in my book and in some details
I take this multiverse hypothesis I take
it very seriously take it on as an
alternative explanation but it turns out
that in order for you to have a
plausible multiverse hypothesis you have
to have some mechanism for generating
all the other universes if these other
universes were just out there and they
had no connection to us at all then they
wouldn't affect the probabilities in our
universe in order to portray them as the
outcome of a giant lottery there must be
some kind of common cause some universe
generating mechanism that's responsible
for all the different universes all the
proliferation now you're hurting my head
so you get a stop okay I might say
almost gonna pay off all right okay and
everyone will get this okay turns out
that the met the universe generating
mechanisms yeah themselves have to be
finely tuned to produce new universes so
in order to explain the fine-tuning you
have to invoke a mechanism that requires
still prior fine-tuning that that is
hilarious
and that's why it is a not really great
that is
but I just find it funny because it gets
to the bigger question right we live in
a world where it is assumed that there's
a problem between faith and science
right and there are many people who
believe that the problem with faith is
that science disproves it or something
I mean people believe that in the 18th
century when they knew like nothing no
it's it's now the opposite it's it's the
committed scientific materialists are
scientific atheists that are twisting
themselves into pretzels right to
formulate these speculative cosmological
theories to get around things like the
fine-tuning or the evidence for a
beginning that we've had since the 1920s
and with a big bang theory well again
this is what I just find so funny
because you know even I can see that it
only becomes more difficult like
something has happened and who knew that
this would happen that science would
inevitably point us more and more and
more and more and more to the god
hypothesis you don't have to like it you
don't have to accept it but you have to
deal with it and that's basically what
you're dealing with in this in the new
book right and it also is in that book
that what we're not talking well the the
two books I've done to this point er
about the evidence for design at two key
points in the history of life the origin
of the first life and then the origin
animal life but in the Cambrian
explosion explosion very good
only about 550 yeah million years when I
when I was on a talk show with one of
your colleagues Dennis Miller he says so
Stevie tell me about this Caribbean
explosion thing he says that's right no
that's a drink yeah but anyway what I'm
doing in in in this book I I reprised
those biological design arguments but
then I say but let's look what do we
what else do we know that might help us
identify the designer to paint a profile
of the kind of intelligence that would
be necessary to account for not just the
evidence of design and biology but the
whole ensemble of evidence that we have
about biological and cosmological
origins what could explain that
fine-tuning if the
multiverse just leads to a begging of
the question and saying well you know
pushing the question you know the origin
of that fine-tuning back one when a
degree of separation without answering
it what do we knew what kind then
intelligent design really does look to
be a better explanation but now that
intelligent design must have been
present from the very beginning of the
universe it must have been capable of
building that into the beginning of the
universe and that starts to look like an
intelligence which transcends the
universe itself okay that's the key
right right say not just at the
beginning of the universe but clearly at
some point before the beginning of the
universe exactly and if you're talking
about something before the beginning of
the universe you're talking about
something before time well and and the
developments in cosmology proper have
reinforced that in a really powerful way
I'll tell the story tomorrow in my talk
in the morning about the discovery of
the expanding universe and the and the
the going in the other direction the
discovery that the universe had a
beginning now called the Big Bang Theory
and it's an exciting story and lots of
interesting twists and turns in it but
in 1968 after most of the observational
evidence was now pointing to a beginning
of the universe Stephen Hawking working
with the oxford physicists Roger Penrose
proved something called the singularity
theorem we go back we're talking about
gravity a little bit ago the new
Einstein Ian view of gravity is that you
have a massive body it's curving the
space around it and Hawking was studying
as a PhD student black holes which are
places where there's so much mass
concentrated that it curved space so
tightly that not even light can get out
and as he was working on on that he got
to thinking about well what would happen
how does this apply to the whole cosmos
because if the universe is expanding in
the forward direction of time and matter
is getting more and more dissipated
dispersed in the reverse direction of
time as you back extrapolate you get to
the point where matter would be getting
more and more densely compacted space
would be getting more and more tightly
curved matter would be getting more and
more densely compacted and the math
showed that at some point in the in the
finite past there would be a point where
the curvature of space would go to an
infinite course
bonding to zero spatial volume and what
I used to ask like to ask my students is
this how much stuff can you put in no
space and common sense is no things go
in no space and see the new cosmology is
moving in a decidedly anti-materialistic
direction because if you want explain
the origin of the universe as a
singularity in matter space time and
energy you need a different kind of
cause outside of matter space time and
energy and you know many cosmologists
and astronomers Sandage being one
recognized that that had frankly
theistic implications that look that we
were now painting a profile of the cause
that really only God in the way that
Jews and Christians have portrayed him
meets the has the qualifications and and
why do you say that no there's what if
somebody says there is some intelligence
but not a personal intelligence is that
possible and it was when you talk about
where the scientific evidence is leading
number one it leads us to the idea that
there's a designer but when you talk
about the character of that designer or
the the identity of that designer what
is it exactly that's pointing to that
designer being the god of the Jewish and
Christian well by that but by that I
mean a theistic Creator who is
transcendent and intelligent and active
in the creation at zoos not well not
Zeus not a space alien not a d-stick
creator deism wouldn't explain the by
lot evidence of biological design
because it deals to create are only acts
at the beginning a theistic creator of
the kind that is depicted in the
judeo-christian scriptures acts at the
beginning but then is active in the
creation after time equals zero as well
so what I do in the book is I look at
the ensemble of evidence from the Big
Bang you get transcendence and you find
this even in the materialistic theories
that they attempt to formulate some sort
of other universes to account for what's
going on in this one that's a form of
transcendence problem is they end up
begging the question as to things like
fine-tuning right so but from the
fine-tuning you the the most natural
thing to infer from that is designing
intelligence but that designing
intelligence must be operating from the
beginning
and so when you can join the evidence
from cosmology concerning the beginning
of the universe with the evidence from
physics concerning the fine-tuning of
the universe you get a transcendent
intelligence as as the the the best
explanation that what would be necessary
to explain the effect and then when you
add the biological evidence downstream
that yeah the biological episode so what
you said is that unless if we're not
talking about intelligent design before
we get to this concept of intelligent
design we can talk about hmm
a God who is outside of time and space
who created the universe well then you
know and we add intelligent design you
your biology then you can see that that
wouldn't be a deistic creator because
then okay but a lot of people including
myself are always unclear on deistic
theistic so what you mean is that
initially there's a god outside of time
and space who creates the universe but
intelligent design says that science
says that god is active after the
creation of the university that's the
evidence we have that's evident these
infusions of information that are
necessary to build new forms of life
come well after the beginning and so
deism holds that God there's a God God
created the universe in the beginning
but then has had a hands-off policy on a
clock okay and so what I do in the book
is I examine all these the scientific
case for the beginning the scientific
case for the fine-tuning and then the
scientific case for the evidence of
design and biology with the the these
big infusions of information and II and
then and then then I step back and I say
all right now we can have a we have a
scientific hypothesis the universe had a
beginning we have a scientific
hypothesis or a philosophical hypothesis
that there was design at the beginning
we compare that to the multiverse and we
argue their reasons to prefer a theistic
design hypothesis over the multiverse
but then I step back and I look at what
if we took the big world view systems of
thought theism deism pantheism the
Eastern philosophical system
and and and in materialism and look at
which and treat them as hypotheses call
it a metaphysical hypothesis the
worldview hypothesis scientific
hypothesis I don't care we we just want
to know which one best explains this
ensemble of evidence we have about
biological and cosmological origins
which one explains it best
well deism could explain the fine-tuning
and the origin of the universe the
cosmology piece but it doesn't do a good
job of explaining the biology evidence
the space alien hypothesis might I'm
really dubious on this but might explain
the biological design evidence but it
can't explain the cosmology to the
physics even an alien can't create the
Big Bang can't because he operates it
exists within the universes that
expanding from that point forward and
then if we look at pantheism which is
which makes God it makes God and mater
coextensive it's the same thing so it
has the same problem materialism it does
it has no transcendent entity to refer
to no nothing beyond God is inside time
and space and the universe had a time
and space in universe well created well
yeah materialism can't explain any of
these things because materialism there's
nothing beyond matter space time and
energy to do the causing if you will
when you're talking about the origin of
the universe of the origin of the
fine-tuning and then when you get to the
biological design case that's a big
argument I've made in the books that we
lack a materialistic explanation of
information okay well so I guess I have
to as you say all this you know you're
saying that now you have put this
together in such a way that if we had to
guess based on the evidence based on the
scientific evidence whether there's a
God and whether that God is like the God
of the Bible we would at this point
because of the evidence have to say yes
I would say we can infer a God with
those attributes transcendence
intelligence great power and God who is
active in the creation on the basis of
the evidence that we have in the natural
world we can move from that ever
to that hypothesis as a best explanation
for the evidence itself we don't
remember we don't get proofs in science
of the deductive form that you get in
mathematics right or of the ability in
the case of any historical science
we can't observationally verify that
because all these things happened a long
time ago but Darwin couldn't either
right there's a different type of
scientific reasoning we're using and
it's sometimes called the method the
method of multiple competing hypotheses
or the method of inferring to the best
explanation
it's the method that Darwin used and
it's the method that we use first to
make the case for intelligent design and
that and and the method that I use to
argue that the best candidate for that
designing intelligence is actually a God
who has the attributes that Jews and
Christians have long affirmed I mean but
even taking another realm of science
it's the method all of us use if you
know ordinary life if we're thinking
logically about this this this or this
an murder mystery this is what you're
doing this is what our brains do and so
really ultimately Steven what you're
saying
therefore strikes me as historic and
extremely exciting do you have a sense
of what you have I'm tremendously
excited about it in part it's so fun to
do this interview here because the idea
of this germinated for me on February
10th 1985 listening to these amazing
scientists and I realized I want to be
part of this and I took because of my
relationship with Charles Saxton whom
entered me I took a deep dive on this
origin of life question and it took me
until 2009 to get that book out and I
had a lot of people asking are you ever
gonna write that book and but I now had
the opportunity to come back to this and
pull all these threads together and it's
a little sense just it personally in my
life a sense that my colleague Paul
Nelson says nothing goes to waste and
there's a sense that yeah all these side
Eddie's these great conversations I've
had some of the tremendous the
scientists I've met the philosophers the
the debates I've had with people
the other side of the question I know
how they're thinking and I know what
their objections are and so in the book
I make the positive case and then I
won't respond one by one to these these
objections and I am excited I do feel
like that we've landed the argument in
the right place we're not I definitely
don't to overstate this this isn't a
proof I do want to oversteer but but I
do think if you stand back and look at
this the universe had a beginning the
universe has been finely tuned since the
beginning for life and there have been
big infusions of information into the
cosmos into the universe at periodic
episodes after the beginning when you
add all that up that looks like theism
to me not like materialism not like
pantheism not like deism and certainly
not like space alien ism and when I add
up what you just said it sounds like the
return of the god hypothesis is gonna be
a huge bestseller that's my hypothesis
my final question is Steven Mayer where
can we get this lovely product well
right now it's available for pre-order
on Amazon and them or the other you know
online booksellers I wanted to end up
the tackiest possible question where can
we get this fantastic product it is
available for pre-order now yeah right
okay and and I know this since I'm an
author
sometimes when you pre-order they give
you the best price between the day you
order and the day it comes out so if it
like and usually they drop the price
whatever I didn't mean for this to be
commercial but just so people understand
you'd like they give you the best price
for pre-ordering Steven I am just like
flipped out excited that I was already
excited but to hear you go through this
well I just feel like we're living in a
really exciting it's really exciting
there's an historian of science
Frederick Burnham who says that the god
hypothesis is a more respectable
hypothesis now than at any time in the
last 100 years and I'd go further than
that and say that actually the god
hypothesis provides the best explanation
of this ensemble of evidence but
contrast that with the public perception
of what science has to say about the
credibility of belief in God that
from so many popular authors whether
we're talking about Richard Dawkins or
Bill Nye the Science Guy or Neil
deGrasse Tyson or any of the popular new
atheist authors we have exactly the
opposite message being promulgated all
throughout the culture but they're
talking about the science of the late
19th century there and we've had a
dramatic shift that they haven't kept up
with well that's right well
unfortunately we're out of time but I
guess in closing I want to say all those
folks that you just mentioned boy
they're in big trouble your book is
going to really ruffle some feathers and
I just I just can't believe that we've
come to a point now where we had this
kind of evidence and then we have you
who it's my hypothesis you were created
by God and that God created you to be
able to put this stuff together so that
the rest of us could understand that not
only is there no problem between faith
and science but that science points to
faith that's crazy stuff I'm very
grateful for you and we're grateful to
all of you for coming Stephen thank you
so much Eric
[Music]
you